>> A 1,000-year-old surprise
found in a farmer's field,
and a glimpse into a spiritually
transformational time
in our human past.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
According to the
Archeology News Network,
local farmer Leonard Larson
was plowing his field
in southern Sweden when he
hit a massive flat stone.
When he was able
to flip it over,
he was surprised to find it
was actually a 1,000-year-old
impeccably preserved runestone.
Runes, at the most
essential level,
was the written form of the
proto Norse, an old Norse
language which
the Vikings spoke.
A runestone was often erected
to honor a dead relative.
Kaedrich Olsen, author of
"Runes For Transformation,"
explains the significance.
>> This is a very common type
of stone that is referring
to the law of Odal, where,
when the father dies,
the son raises a stone
in honor of his father,
not only to commemorate
the passing,
but the stone is placed
in a very prominent place
for passersby to go through so
that going to that land to talk
to the father.
They know that now
the father is dead
and the son has
inherited those lands,
and now they need to
go talk with the son.
>> Local rune expert Magnus
Kallstrom inspected the stone
and determined it to be
from around the first half
of the 11th century.
The stone features a carving
along the edge showing
a serpent biting its
own tail and a cross.
>> We find the image of a
serpent eating its tail,
which is found on a number
of other rune stones,
and it is reminiscent of
the tales of Jormungandr,
the great world serpent who
was so large that he encircles
Midgard or Earth and
eats his own tail.
And this goes back to Western
esotericism of the Ouroboros
as a symbol for infinity
or the infinite mysteries.
Also, interestingly
enough, on this stone,
we find the cross,
which tells us
that this stone comes
from a time period
where we had the pagan
symbolism of Jormungandr
and the cross of Christianity.
So this was appealing to
both sides of the coin
at the time period.
>> The stone also
has an inscription,
which translated
to English, reads,
"Gardar erected this stone
after Sigdjarv, his father,
Ogard's husband."
>> So the inscription that
we find on this stone,
we have [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
And what that is telling
us is that Gardar, the son,
raised the stone for
his father, Sigdjarv.
But what's fascinating
about this stone
is not only the
name of Ogard, which
is the first time we've ever
heard that name on a stone,
but that it has the iconography
of Christian and pagan motifs.
And when we have families
that are divided,
that one side is heathen,
the other side is Christian,
we're going to find some
of these overlapping motifs
to appeal to the pagan side and
to appeal to the Christian side
so that the person is
not, basically, ostracized
from either side of the family.
And what's fascinating
about this stone
is we see those pagan
and Christian motifs
probably appealing to both
sides of Sigdjarv's family,
basically.
It is a rare find.
And what this is just further
confirmation of a time
when pagan and
Christian beliefs did
coincide, the same
time, the same place,
even within the same family.
It was a dismal necessarily mean
that they got along amicably,
but it does mean that
there was an attempt
to appeal to both of
these religious traditions
in some way that the family
could eventually get along,
even if it is for
this one agreement.
>> The stone will be cleaned
up and preserved for future
generations.
To those who think history
has already been written,
we keep unearthing new artifacts
that challenge the mainstream
narrative and offer a
glimpse into belief systems
and how they merge together.
What will we find next?
And what else will
we learn about
our collective human past?
That remains to be seen.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."